<!-- -------------------------------------------------------------------------
//
//       Copyright (C) 2022-2024 Frank Eskesen.
//
//       This file is free content, distributed under the MIT license.
//       (See accompanying file LICENSE.MIT or the original contained
//       within https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)
//
//----------------------------------------------------------------------------
//
// Title-
//       ~/src/Edit/Xcb/.USAGE.md
//
// Purpose-
//       Editor usage information
//
// Last change date-
//       2024/04/10
//
-------------------------------------------------------------------------- -->

# Editor usage information

Copyright (C) 2022-2024 Frank Eskesen.

This file is free content, distributed under the MIT license.
(See accompanying file LICENSE.MIT or the original contained
within https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)

------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Editor is a WYSIWYG editor that uses X11's XCB functionality to control
the screen, keyboard, and mouse.
Since it's based on XCB, it only operates under Cygwin or Linux.
Most of the XCB functionality is offloaded into the GUI library, part of the
code distribution package.
The Editor also uses the PUB library.

It's derived from ~/src/cpp/Edit, also a WYSIWYG editor.
That editor uses the screen, keyboard and other functions provided in the
COM library. There is limited mouse support.
The COM library uses Windows(TM) functions and Linux ncurses for screen and
keyboard control.

(*WYSIWYG*: What You See Is What You Get.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## The editor command line
Each parameter is the name of a file to be edited.

## General usage notes
The tab key moves the cursor. Shift-TAB reverse-tabs the cursor.
Tabs in the text always take up one column.
The TABS command sets the initial tabs.
After the last user-defined tab, tabs are at 8 character boundaries.

Use Alt-\\, Backspace to type a '\b' (0x08) character;
Alt-\\, TAB to type a '\t' (0x09) character; and
Alt-\\, ESC to type a '\e' (0x1B) character.

When any line is changed, it is saved with trailing blanks removed.
If the last line has no delimiter and is changed, its delimiter is changed to
'\n' or "\r\n" depending upon the file mode.

Move operations using marked lines are divided in two parts: cut,
then paste<sup>1</sup>.
This implies that for a move operation creates two UNDO operations:
the first removing the paste and the second restoring the cut.
Also, alt-C can be used for cut and ctrl-V for paste.

## Editor clip (Internal clipboard)

The editor DOES NOT USE the system clipboard (yet.)
Using the system clipboard is on the to-do list, but isn't a high priority.

The internal clipboard and the system clipboard will be maintained separately.

------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Editor command guide (Command names are not case sensitive)
<dl>
<dt>BOT:   </dt><dd>Move the cursor to the end-of-file editor line
                    (column 0)</dd>
<dt>C:     </dt><dd>(Change) example: `C /find string/replace string/`
(Searching begins at the *current* character)</dd>
<dt>DEBLANK: </dt><dd>Remove trailing blanks from all lines.</dd>
<br>(For performance reasons, DEBLANK does not support UNDO.)</dd>
dt>DETAB: </dt><dd>Convert file tabs to spaces. This always uses default
tab (on 8 column) spacing.
<br>(For performance reasons, DETAB does not support UNDO.)</dd>
<dt>E:     </dt><dd>(Alias of EDIT)</dd>
<dt>EDIT:  </dt><dd>Edit another set of files
(Only the file name can contain wildcards. The path name cannot.)</dd>
<dt>EXIT:  </dt><dd>Exit (safely.)
If no files are changed, close the Editor.</dd>
<dt>BOT:   </dt><dd>Move the cursor to the last editor line (column 0)</dd>
<dt>FILE:  </dt><dd>Save and close the current file</dd>
<dt>FORMAT: </dt><dd>Save and close the current file</dd>
<dt>L:     </dt><dd>(Locate) example: `/find string/`
(Searching begins at the *next* character)</dd>
<dt>QUIT:  </dt><dd>(Unconditionally) close the current file</dd>
<dt>SAVE:  </dt><dd>Save the current file, leaving it active
(The UNDO/REDO lists are deleted. There is no UN-SAVE.)</dd>
<dt>SET:   </dt>
<dd>Set an option (Example: `set mixed on`)</dd>
<dl>
<dt>MIXED: </dt><dd>Set locate mixed case mode (ON or off)</dd>
<dt>MODE:  </dt><dd>Change all file line delimiters (DOS or UNIX)</dd>
<dt>PRIOR: </dt><dd>Set locate prior mode (ON or off)</dd>
<dt>WRAP:  </dt><dd>Set locate wrap mode (ON or off)</dd>
</dl>
</dd>
<dt>SORT:  </dt><dd>Sort the file list (by file name, ignoring path name)</dd>
<dt>TOP:   </dt><dd>Move the cursor to the first editor line (column 0)</dd>
</dl>

------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Editor key bindings
<dl>
<dt>Alt-B: </dt><dd>Mark block  (Column)</dd>
<dt>Alt-C: </dt><dd>Copy mark   (lines or block)
(and replace the internal Editor clipboard)</dd>
<dt>Alt-D: </dt><dd>Delete mark (lines or block)
(and replace the internal Editor clipboard)</dd>
<dt>Alt-I: </dt><dd>Insert line</dd>
<dt>Alt-J: </dt><dd>Join the cursor line and the following line</dd>
<dt>Alt-L: </dt><dd>Mark line</dd>
<dt>Alt-M: </dt><dd>Move mark   (lines or block)
(and replace the internal Editor clipboard)</dd>
<dt>Alt-P: </dt><dd>Format the mark. The marked lines are formatted into
paragraphs. That is, marked lines with text are split into words: contiguous
characters delimited by whitespace.
These lines are reassembled intowith words separated by a single blank.
Reassembly begins at the left (1st) margin and end at the right
(2nd) margin. </dd>
<dt>Alt-S: </dt><dd>Split the current line at the cursor column</dd>
<dt>Alt-U: </dt><dd>Undo mark</dd>
<dt>Alt-\: </dt><dd>Escape the next character, including BS, TAB, and ESC.</dd>
<br>
<dt>Ctrl-C: </dt><dd>Copy mark   (Same as Alt-C or first half of Alt-M)</dd>
<dt>Ctrl-S: </dt><dd>Save the current file.</dd>
<dt>Ctrl-Q: </dt><dd>Quit safely. Close the file if it's unchanged.</dd>
<dt>Ctrl-V: </dt><dd>Paste copy  (from the internal Editor clipboard.)</dd>
<dt>Ctrl-X: </dt><dd>Delete mark (Same as Alt-D)</dd>
<dt>Ctrl-Y: </dt><dd>REDO (Same as F12)</dd>
<dt>Ctrl-Z: </dt><dd>UNDO (Same as F11)</dd>
<dt>Ctrl-Enter: </dt><dd>Insert line (Same as Alt-I)</dd>
<br>
<dt>ESC:   </dt><dd>Switch between command and data mode</dd>
<dt>F1:    </dt><dd>Help message (to stdout)</dd>
<dt>F2:    </dt><dd>(No operation)</dd>
<dt>F3:    </dt><dd>Quit (safely.) Close the file if it's unchanged.</dd>
<dt>F4:    </dt><dd>Move focus to next changed file</dd>
<dt>F5:    </dt><dd>Repeat locate</dd>
<dt>F6:    </dt><dd>Repeat change</dd>
<dt>F7:    </dt><dd>Move focus to previous file</dd>
<dt>F8:    </dt><dd>Move focus to next file</dd>
<dt>F9:    </dt><dd>Copy the (fully qualified) file name to command line</dd>
<dt>Ctrl-F9:</dt><dd>Copy the cursor line to command line</dd>
<dt>F10:   </dt><dd>Move the current line to top of screen</dd>
<dt>F11:   </dt><dd>UNDO (Note: DETAB and SAVE operations cannot be undone)
                </dd>
<dt>F12:   </dt><dd>REDO</dd>
</dl>

Note: After an UNDO operation any new operation that commits a line change
creates a new UNDO item but irrevocably deletes the current REDO list.

#### Synonyms

* Alt-D and Ctrl-X
* Alt-I and Ctrl-Enter
* Alt-Q and F3

-------- Footnotes -----------------------------------------------------------

<sup>1</sup> Why split move into cut and paste?<br/>
The quick answer is that it simplifies REDO and UNDO logic.
Move can move lines or blocks from one file to another.
Since REDO and UNDO are file-specific operations, it would be impossible to
REDO or UNDO a file to file move after one of the files was closed.
