<!-- -------------------------------------------------------------------------
//
//       Copyright (C) 2022 Frank Eskesen.
//
//       This file is free content, distributed under the MIT license.
//       (See accompanying file LICENSE.MIT or the original contained
//       within https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)
//
//----------------------------------------------------------------------------
//
// Title-
//       ~/src/lib/pub/.LOGICS.md
//
// Purpose-
//       PUB library internal logic description
//
// Last change date-
//       2022/08/23
//
-------------------------------------------------------------------------- -->

# ~/src/lib/pub/.LOGICS.md

Copyright (C) 2022 Frank Eskesen.

This file is free content, distributed under the MIT license.
(See accompanying file LICENSE.MIT or the original contained
within https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)

----

This README describes the PUB (public) library logic where
additional information might be useful.

----

## Latch.h

Latch.h defines some primitive locking mechanisms that implement *Lockable*
thereore can be used with `std::lock_guard`, `std::unique_lock`, and similar
STL (Standard Template Library) functions.

It is a self-contained header file. There is no associated Latch.cpp module.

All Latch instances implement *Lockable* and interoperate with the STL.
They also implement the reset method, which unconditionally resets the Latch
to its initial available state.

Latch objects do not inherit from Object.
They do not and never will contain virtual functions.
Most latch types may be used within constructors, but the XCL_latch requires
construction and therefore cannot be so used.

All Latch objects are defined as structs rather than classes.

#### Latch

Latch is a primitive spin latch.
If the latch is not immediately available, the implementation retries the
compare_exchange_strong opertation testing for it to become available.
The current implementation escapes the spin every 16 retries, then alternates
between `std::thread::yield` and `std::this_thread::sleep_for(interval)`.
The interval is the current spin count in nanoseconds, making the interval
between spin retries gradually increase.

<!-- -------------------------------------------------------------------------
// Implementation timing bringup reminder:
//   x000f/0010: 31.5 @ 70% [w/ browser] 35.9 @ 40% [no browser]
-------------------------------------------------------------------------- -->

Error checks: unlock when latch not locked.

#### RecursiveLatch

RecursiveLatch is a primitive spin latch, consisting of an atomic
`std::thread::id` (the actual latch) and a non-atomic recursion count.
Note that the latch must be held whenever the count is updated.

There is no arithmetic overflow check for the count. As an intptr_t,
it can't overflow in normal use since memory would first become full of
subroutine or method return addresses.

Error checks: unlock when latch not locked.

#### SHR_latch / XCL_latch pair
The SHR_latch is used to provide shared access to a resource, and the
XCL_latch is used to provide exclusive access to that resource.

The high order bit of the share count is used as an indication that the
exclusive latch is either held or reserved. While held or reserved, no
shared latch access is granted.

In order to obtain an exclusive latch, the try_lock implementation first
reserves it.
It then spins, waiting for all shared latch holders to release the latch.

A thread may hold either the SHR_latch or the associated XCL_latch, but not
both.
If it attempts to obtain the XCL_latch while holding the SHR_latch, the
SHR_latch isn't ever going to be released.
If it attempts to obtain the XCL_latch while holding the XCL_latch, it won't
be able to reserve the XCL_latch since it's already reserved.
Either way, the lock attempt deadlocks.

While downgrade from XCL_latch to SHR_latch is supported, upgrade from
SHR_latch to XCL_latch is not.
If two threads, each holding a SHR_latch, simultaneously attempted to upgrade
the thread that obtained the XCL_latch reservation would need to wait until
all shared accesses but one were released.
However, the second thread would spin attempting to obtain the XCL_latch
reservation, never releasing it's SHR_latch.
A deadlock results.

#### NullLatch

The NullLatch is a special-purpose single thread optimizing latch.

In code that may be conditionally compiled either for single-threaded or
multi-threaded operation, a NullLatch can be used instead of a Latch when
compiled in single-threaded mode.

The NullLatch has no overhead when used with an optimizing compiler.

#### TestLatch
The TestLatch is a special purpose (debugging) Latch that explicitly disallows
recursion, thus detecting Latch self-deadlocks.
If a thread attempts to obtain a TestLatch while holding it, a
`std::runtime_error` is thrown.
(*THE LATCH IS RELEASED* before the exception is thrown.)

----
